README.md, before:

# Introduction to Chapel

[Chapel](https://github.com/chapel-lang/chapel/) is a programming language for productive parallel computing. This repository contains code from the [October 2023 Tutorial](https://chapel-lang.org/tutorials.html).

To get started with this template, you can either use [GitHub Codespaces](#using-a-codespace) or [your own machine](#using-your-machine).

## Using a Codespace

> :warning: Because Codespaces are a virtualized environment running on shared hardware with a modest core count, don't expect parallelism or performance observed here to be reflective of what a native installation of Chapel can achieve.

This repo includes a `devcontainer.json` file, making it usable from GitHub Codespaces. When viewing this repository from GitHub's UI, click __Use this template > Open in a codespace__ to get started. The codespace includes the Visual Studio Code extension for Chapel, and tools such as [`chpl-language-server`](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/main/tools/chpl-language-server/chpl-language-server.html) and [`chplcheck`](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/main/tools/chplcheck/chplcheck.html).

In the Codespace, compile Chapel programs using the __Terminal__ tab by using the `chpl` compiler:

```bash
chpl 01-hello.chpl
./01-hello
```

Although the Codespace is set to a single-locale (single-node) mode by default, you can simulate multiple nodes by setting the `CHPL_COMM` environment variable to `gasnet` when compiling.

```bash
# Compile a program that distributes computation to multiple nodes
CHPL_COMM=gasnet chpl 01-hellopar.chpl

# Run hello using two simulated nodes
./01-hellopar -nl 2
```

To avoid having to include `CHPL_COMM` in each compilation command, you can
`export` it:

```bash
export CHPL_COMM=gasnet
chpl 01-hellopar.chpl
./01-hellopar -nl 2
```

## Using Docker

Install Docker (see the [Installing Docker](#installing-docker) section below for suggestions). Then, use the following command:

```bash
docker pull docker.io/chapel/chapel-gasnet
```

Next follow the instructions at https://hub.docker.com/r/chapel/chapel to compile a hello world in Chapel, but use the `chapel-gasnet` container and when you run the “hello” executable specify `-nl 1`.  Here are the commands to use:

```
echo 'writeln("Hello, world!");' > hello.chpl

docker run --rm -it -v "$PWD":/myapp -w /myapp chapel/chapel-gasnet /bin/bash

root@xxxxxxxxx:/myapp# chpl hello.chpl
root@xxxxxxxxx:/myapp# ./hello -nl 1
Hello, world!
```

## Using Your Machine

Please follow the instructions on the [Download Chapel](https://chapel-lang.org/download.html) page to get set up with the Chapel compiler `chpl`. From there, you can compile and run the `hello.chpl` file in this repository as follows:

```bash
chpl 01-hello.chpl
./01-hello
```

To make use of multiple nodes (or to simulate multi-node execution), please
refer to [Multilocale Chapel Execution](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/usingchapel/multilocale.html).

## Installing Docker

### Mac

Download the docker desktop for Intel or Arm as appropriate from
https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/.

Start up docker desktop.  You do not need a docker account.


### Linux

* First three steps on https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/
  1. Set up Docker's Apt repository.
```
  # Add Docker's official GPG key:
  sudo apt-get update
  sudo apt-get install ca-certificates curl gnupg
  sudo install -m 0755 -d /etc/apt/keyrings
  curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.gpg
  sudo chmod a+r /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.gpg

  # Add the repository to Apt sources:
  echo "deb [arch="$(dpkg --print-architecture)" signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/docker.gpg]   https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu "$(. /etc/os-release && echo "$VERSION_CODENAME")" stable" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.list > /dev/null
  sudo apt-get update
```

  2. Install the Docker packages.
```
  sudo apt-get install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin docker-compose-plugin
```

  3. Verify that the Docker Engine installation is successful by running the hello-world image.
```
  sudo docker run hello-world
```


* Additional steps
```
  sudo groupadd docker
  sudo usermod -aG docker ${USER}

  # maybe not necessary
  sudo chmod 666 /var/run/docker.sock

```

### Windows

1. download docker for windows from: https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install/
  a. when promted to log in or create an account, select continue without logging in

2. open a Powershell terminal (preferably as admin)
  a. if you don't have WSL installed, execute `wsl --install`
  b. next, ensure that your Ubuntu distro is using WSL2 (rather than WSL1).
  Execute `wsl -l -v` and ensure that ubuntu says 2 under version.
   i. If it is on version 1, execute `wsl --set-version ubuntu 2` (may take some time)

3. open the docker desktop app to start the docker daemon
  a. you can check that docker is using WSL Ubuntu by going to
  Settings > Resources > WSL Integration

4. in Powershell, execute docker pull chapel/chapel-gasnet

*NOTE*: For Windows you will probably have to replace the `$PWD` from the instructions
at https://hub.docker.com/r/chapel/chapel with the Windows version of the current path
written out

Commit message:

Add links to the slide deck
Signed-off-by: Danila Fedorin <daniel.fedorin@hpe.com>

README.md, after:

# Introduction to Chapel

[Chapel](https://github.com/chapel-lang/chapel/) is a programming language for productive parallel computing. This repository contains code from the [October 2023 Tutorial](https://chapel-lang.org/tutorials.html).

To get started with this template, you can either use [GitHub Codespaces](#using-a-codespace) or [your own machine](#using-your-machine).

The files in this repository correspond to slide decks from the tutorial.
Specifically, the prefix number of each file (the `01` in `01-hello.chpl`)
determines which slide deck walks through that particular file. Please
consult the following table for links to the individual slide decks.

| Prefix | Example File    | Slide Deck |
|--------|-----------------|------------|
| `01`   | `01-hello.chpl` | [Introduction to Chapel](https://chapel-lang.org/tutorials/Oct2023/01-Chapel-Intro.pdf) |
| `02`   | `02-tuples.chpl` | [Chapel Basics](https://chapel-lang.org/tutorials/Oct2023/02-Chapel-Basics.pdf) |
| `03`   | `03-onClause.chpl` | [Parallelism In Chapel](https://chapel-lang.org/tutorials/Oct2023/03-Chapel-Parallelism.pdf) |
| `04`   | `04-atomic-type.chpl` | [More Parallelism](https://chapel-lang.org/tutorials/Oct2023/04-Chapel-MorePar.pdf) |


## Using a Codespace

> :warning: Because Codespaces are a virtualized environment running on shared hardware with a modest core count, don't expect parallelism or performance observed here to be reflective of what a native installation of Chapel can achieve.

This repo includes a `devcontainer.json` file, making it usable from GitHub Codespaces. When viewing this repository from GitHub's UI, click __Use this template > Open in a codespace__ to get started. The codespace includes the Visual Studio Code extension for Chapel, and tools such as [`chpl-language-server`](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/main/tools/chpl-language-server/chpl-language-server.html) and [`chplcheck`](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/main/tools/chplcheck/chplcheck.html).

In the Codespace, compile Chapel programs using the __Terminal__ tab by using the `chpl` compiler:

```bash
chpl 01-hello.chpl
./01-hello
```

Although the Codespace is set to a single-locale (single-node) mode by default, you can simulate multiple nodes by setting the `CHPL_COMM` environment variable to `gasnet` when compiling.

```bash
# Compile a program that distributes computation to multiple nodes
CHPL_COMM=gasnet chpl 01-hellopar.chpl

# Run hello using two simulated nodes
./01-hellopar -nl 2
```

To avoid having to include `CHPL_COMM` in each compilation command, you can
`export` it:

```bash
export CHPL_COMM=gasnet
chpl 01-hellopar.chpl
./01-hellopar -nl 2
```

## Using Docker

Install Docker (see the [Installing Docker](#installing-docker) section below for suggestions). Then, use the following command:

```bash
docker pull docker.io/chapel/chapel-gasnet
```

Next follow the instructions at https://hub.docker.com/r/chapel/chapel to compile a hello world in Chapel, but use the `chapel-gasnet` container and when you run the “hello” executable specify `-nl 1`.  Here are the commands to use:

```
echo 'writeln("Hello, world!");' > hello.chpl

docker run --rm -it -v "$PWD":/myapp -w /myapp chapel/chapel-gasnet /bin/bash

root@xxxxxxxxx:/myapp# chpl hello.chpl
root@xxxxxxxxx:/myapp# ./hello -nl 1
Hello, world!
```

## Using Your Machine

Please follow the instructions on the [Download Chapel](https://chapel-lang.org/download.html) page to get set up with the Chapel compiler `chpl`. From there, you can compile and run the `hello.chpl` file in this repository as follows:

```bash
chpl 01-hello.chpl
./01-hello
```

To make use of multiple nodes (or to simulate multi-node execution), please
refer to [Multilocale Chapel Execution](https://chapel-lang.org/docs/usingchapel/multilocale.html).

## Installing Docker

### Mac

Download the docker desktop for Intel or Arm as appropriate from
https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/.

Start up docker desktop.  You do not need a docker account.


### Linux

* First three steps on https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/ubuntu/
  1. Set up Docker's Apt repository.
```
  # Add Docker's official GPG key:
  sudo apt-get update
  sudo apt-get install ca-certificates curl gnupg
  sudo install -m 0755 -d /etc/apt/keyrings
  curl -fsSL https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu/gpg | sudo gpg --dearmor -o /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.gpg
  sudo chmod a+r /etc/apt/keyrings/docker.gpg

  # Add the repository to Apt sources:
  echo "deb [arch="$(dpkg --print-architecture)" signed-by=/etc/apt/keyrings/docker.gpg]   https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu "$(. /etc/os-release && echo "$VERSION_CODENAME")" stable" | sudo tee /etc/apt/sources.list.d/docker.list > /dev/null
  sudo apt-get update
```

  2. Install the Docker packages.
```
  sudo apt-get install docker-ce docker-ce-cli containerd.io docker-buildx-plugin docker-compose-plugin
```

  3. Verify that the Docker Engine installation is successful by running the hello-world image.
```
  sudo docker run hello-world
```


* Additional steps
```
  sudo groupadd docker
  sudo usermod -aG docker ${USER}

  # maybe not necessary
  sudo chmod 666 /var/run/docker.sock

```

### Windows

1. download docker for windows from: https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install/
  a. when promted to log in or create an account, select continue without logging in

2. open a Powershell terminal (preferably as admin)
  a. if you don't have WSL installed, execute `wsl --install`
  b. next, ensure that your Ubuntu distro is using WSL2 (rather than WSL1).
  Execute `wsl -l -v` and ensure that ubuntu says 2 under version.
   i. If it is on version 1, execute `wsl --set-version ubuntu 2` (may take some time)

3. open the docker desktop app to start the docker daemon
  a. you can check that docker is using WSL Ubuntu by going to
  Settings > Resources > WSL Integration

4. in Powershell, execute docker pull chapel/chapel-gasnet

*NOTE*: For Windows you will probably have to replace the `$PWD` from the instructions
at https://hub.docker.com/r/chapel/chapel with the Windows version of the current path
written out
